xxxiv ' ruruooucrron.

or nine months after the arrival of the Pompeian forces.¹

In the meantime Caesar, displaying extraordinary energy,²'
tact, and consideration,³ had made himself master of Italy,
Ἴ where he found the people kindly disposed toward him³,
had restored order at Rome, had defeated the Pompeian ,
lieutenantS‚ Afranius, PetreiuS, and Varro, in Spain; and
in Jan, 48 rac, he crossed the Adriatic and began the ἵ
offensive operations against Pompey which ended in the ¹
victory near Pharsalus, Aug. 9, 48 rac. Pompey fled, but
was murdered about three weeks later, while landing at
Pelusium in Egypt*
Cicero had been coldly received by the Pompeians at
Dyrrachium,⁵ and had little to do with the preparation for
the struggle.⁸ A serious indisposition also kept him at

Dyrrachium, so that he was not present at the battle of
Pharsalus.⁷

VII. Urvnnn crasm's Govsnnunur.

(Aet. sooz. ac. 47-45. Epist. clv-Lxxxrv.)

32. After the battle of Pharsalus Cicero remained for a
time at Corcyra⁸ and Patrae‚⁹ and then decided to return to
Italy. He reached Brundisium ¹⁰ in Oct, 48 rae, and stayed
there until Sept, 47 ue, passing one of the most miserable
years of his life. He was distressed by both political and
domestic anxieties. He had returned contrary to the express
orders of Caesar, who had forbidden the Pompeians to enter
Italy.ll He was therefore a political fugitive in a city filled

lSchmidt, Briesw. pp. 183-4. ⁷Att. rr. 4. 2; Fam. 9. 18. 23
2Att. 8. 9. 4. Plut. Cic. 39

⁸Att. 8. 13· ⁸Att. 11. 5. 4.

⁴Caes. B. C. 3. 104 ⁹Fam, 13· 17. 1.

⁵Att. 11. d 6. ¹⁰ Fam. 14. η.

fArt. 11. 4. r. ¹² Art. 11. 7. a.

 

